let me then move to the second related
feature and do that through the second
riddle second riddle was widened Darwin
used the word evolution he doesn't as a
study called the process descent with
modification neither did most of the
other major early in mid 19th century
evolutionists lemak for example talks
about transform yzma transform ISM
Haeckel in Germany but that obstinate
leva for the doctrine of descent they do
not call it evolution why not and I
think the answer is actually pretty
simple with a much shorter riddle the
first one like that's the slide to show
the word evolution was perfectly good
English vernacular word thought have
been progress there's the largely poetic
word it comes from the Latin evolute do
which is unfolding in a refers to a kind
of predictably progressive upward
unfolding now Darwin never would have
chosen that vernacular English word for
the process why because his theory
almost uniquely among other proposed
19th century mechanisms his theory of
evolution has no inherent vector of
progress in the basic mechanics now
Darwin is an eminent Victorian managed
to smuggle progress of this notions
through subsidiaries illogical argument
to eminent of Victorian to do away with
it altogether the DAR was delighted in
recognizing that what I like to call the
bare-bones mechanics of his theory
included no statement about progress in
that Universal predictable sense of a
cosmic betterment what Darwin's theories
about is only adaptation to changing
local circumstances that's all it is
yes the mammal with hair is a better
elephant for a cold environments not a
better elephant and he toss them since
all you get out of Darwinism is
adaptation to changing local
circumstance that's all there is no
inherent predictable progressiva skom
ponent and that's very frightening to
many of us who wish to see human beings
is the end result of the predictable
progressive process and we want to see
whatever evolutionary mechanism we allow
producing this in some intrinsic way dar
was very clear on that the office I'd
live in now at Harvard used to belong to
an American paleontologist named
Alphaeus Pyatt who believed an
inherently progressive evolution Darwin
had a long correspondence with them and
eventually rode in
frustration too high it after long
reflection darling writes I cannot avoid
the conclusion that no in here in
tendency to progressive development
exists now there is no greater bias to
this day in pop culture understanding of
evolution than this miss equation of the
concept of evolution with progress and
I'd like to show a series of slides that
illustrate that and then give you a
better take on what Darwinism about and
the fact will show all the slides right
you
this first to make a general point about
Darwin's radicalism our standard picture
of Darwin is as an old man living in his
country home the sage down if you will
and somehow it's hard to see a man so
genial and so elderly as a great source
of radical innovation now that's a
terrible ages prejudice anyway but such
that it is I would like to point out
this is a frontispiece that a colleague
of mine drew several years ago it's
meant to be humorous but it makes a
serious point it says how Charles darn
might have looked as a modern graduate
student just back from five years of
fieldwork this picture is intended to
fix and readers mind the dorm was at his
most innovative at this age and that's
right Darwin's great theorizing was done
in his late twenties and early thirties
this is the Darwin who shook up the
intellectual world and should be so seen
I will show you my favorite symbolic
representation of Darwin's radicalism
and then we will go into the sequence of
slides on progress now this actually
happened this is not a studio set up
this is the campus of Stanford
University after the 1906 earthquake in
San Francisco and what we see is the
statue of Louis Agassiz overturned with
its head in the bottom now here's the
point about this have to understand
Louie actually built the museum at
Harvard that I work in
he was the last great creationist
scientist he was an excellent the
student officials by profession he never
abandoned creationism died unconverted
in 1873 the last great scientific
creationist another scene of the whole
sea I take this as symbolic of Darwin's
overturning of the world
there's Agassiz off ended in askew by
Darwin now there's a wonderful story
that arose out of this which deserves to
be true but this one hit the president
of Stanford University at the time was
David Starr Jordan David Starr Jordan in
his earlier life before he became an
administrator was one of the greatest
American Darwinian scientists and he was
an exile just too so he and Agassiz
shared the same specific subject dishes
but whereas Agassiz was a creationist
David Starr Jordan was one of the first
great evolutionists in Darwinian stance
and Jordan is said to have taken one
look at
and remarked that oh well he had always
thought better of Agassi in the concrete
than in the abstract anyway